A pass at documenting the toolchain implementation (#1897)
carbon-language/carbon-lang: toolchain/README.md

# Toolchain

<!--
Part of the Carbon Language project, under the Apache License v2.0 with LLVM
Exceptions. See /LICENSE for license information.
SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0 WITH LLVM-exception
-->

The toolchain represents the production portion of Carbon. The toolchain's top

> priority is performance: it needs to generate code quickly and scale well.

Reviewer: I think "top priority" is too strong here. Could we instead describe performance as a high priority, or perhaps as a major (the most significant?) difference between the toolchain and explorer? Or perhaps we can summarize all the major differences between toolchain and explorer here (performance, code generation, C++ interop)?

Brainstorming goals for the toolchain and prioritizing them, I get:

1. Correctness.
2. Quality of generated code.
3. Performance.
4. Quality of diagnostics for incorrect or questionable code.

... and I think I might want to rank them in different orders for different build modes (for the development build mode I might put performance at the bottom of the above list).

Author: Added priorities with some small edits, avoiding putting on numbers so there's less of a feeling of strong ranking (particularly for your opt vs dbg point)

The main compiler is `//toolchain/driver:carbon`. When compiling, the current
flow of data is:

1. Load the file into a [SourceBuffer](source/source_buffer.h).
2. Lex a SourceBuffer into a [TokenizedBuffer](lexer/tokenized_buffer.h).
3. Parse a TokenizedBuffer into a [ParseTree](parser/parse_tree.h).
4. Transform a ParseTree into a [SemanticsIR](semantics/semantics_ir.h).
5. This flow is still incomplete: code generation, using LLVM, is still
   required.

## Lexing

The [TokenizedBuffer](lexer/tokenized_buffer.h) is the central point of lexing.

> TODO: Not sure what's worth noting here.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The entire source buffer is converted into tokens before parsing begins. Tokens are referred to by an opaque handle, `TokenizedBuffer::Token`, which is represented as a 32-bit integer into the token array. The tokenized buffer can be queried to discover information about a token, such as its token kind, its location in the source file, and its spelling.

The lexer ensures that all forms of brackets are matched, and is intended to recover from missing brackets based on contextual cues such as indentation (although this is not yet implemented), inserting matching close bracket tokens where it thinks they belong. After the lexer completes, every opening bracket token has a matching closing bracket token.
```

## Parsing

The [ParseTree](parser/parse_tree.h) is the output of parsing, but most logic is
in [ParserImpl](parser/parser_impl.h).

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

The parse tree faithfully represents the tree structure of the source program, interpreted according to the Carbon grammar. No semantics are associated with the tree structure at this level, and no name lookup is performed.

Each parse tree node has an expected structure, corresponding to the grammar of the Carbon language, and the parser ensures that a valid parse tree node always has a valid structure. However, any parse tree node can be marked as invalid, and an invalid parse tree node can contain child nodes of any kind in any order. This is intended to model the situation where parsing failed because the code did not match the grammar, but we were still able to parse some subexpressions, as an aid for non-compiler tools such as syntax highlighters or refactoring tools.

Many functions in the parser return `llvm::Optional<T>`. A return value of `llvm::None` indicates that parsing has failed and an error diagnostic has already been produced, and that the current region of the parse tree might not meet its invariants so that the caller should create an invalid parse tree node. Other return values indicate that parsing was either successful or that any encountered errors have been recovered from, so the caller can create a valid parse tree node.

```

The produced ParseTree is in reverse postorder. For example, given the code:

```carbon
fn foo() -> f64 {
  return 42;
}
```

The node order is (with indentation to indicate nesting):

```carbon
  Index 0: kind DeclaredName
    Index 1: kind ParameterListEnd
  Index 2: kind ParameterList
    Index 3: kind Literal
  Index 4: kind ReturnType
      Index 5: kind Literal
      Index 6: kind StatementEnd
    Index 7: kind ReturnStatement
    Index 8: kind CodeBlockEnd
  Index 9: kind CodeBlock
Index 10: kind FunctionDeclaration
Index 11: kind FileEnd
```

This is done this way in order to allow for more efficient processing of a file.
As a consequence, the SemanticsIR does a lot of reversal of the ParseTree

> ordering in order to produce a more "natural" ordering of file content.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ordering in order to visit code in source order.
```
Just avoiding "natural".

### Stack overflow

The ParseTree has been prone to stack overflows. As a consequence,
`CARBON_RETURN_IF_STACK_LIMITED` is checked at the start of most functions in
order to avoid errors. This manages depth increments and, when the scope exits,
decrements.

## Semantics

The [SemanticsIR](semantics/semantics_ir.h) is the output of semantic
processing. It's currently built using
[a factory](semantics/semantics_ir_factory.h).

The intent is that a SemanticsIR looks closer to a series of instructions than a
tree. This is in order to better align with the LLVM IR structure which will be
used for code generation.

This phase should eventually include semantic checking of the SemanticsIR, but
it's a work in progress.

## Diagnostics

### DiagnosticEmitter

[DiagnosticEmitters](diagnostics/diagnostic_emitter.h) handle the main
formatting of a message. It's parameterized on a location type, for which a

> DiagnosticLocationTranslator must be provided that can translate the location
> type into a standardized DiagnosticLocation of file, line, and column.
> 
> When emitting, the resulting formatted message is passed to a
> DiagnosticConsumer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`DiagnosticLocationTranslator` must be provided that can translate the location
type into a standardized `DiagnosticLocation` of file, line, and column.

When emitting, the resulting formatted message is passed to a
`DiagnosticConsumer`.
```

### DiagnosticConsumers

> DiagnosticConsumers handle output of diagnostic messages after they've been
> formatted by an Emitter. Important consumers are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`DiagnosticConsumers` handle output of diagnostic messages after they've been
formatted by an `Emitter`. Important consumers are:
```

-   [ConsoleDiagnosticConsumer](diagnostics/diagnostic_emitter.h): prints
    diagnostics to console.
-   [ErrorTrackingDiagnosticConsumer](diagnostics/diagnostic_emitter.h): counts
    the number of errors produced, particularly so that it can be determined
    whether any errors were encountered.
-   [SortingDiagnosticConsumer](diagnostics/sorting_diagnostic_consumer.h):
    sorts diagnostics by line so that diagnostics are seen in terminal based on
    their order in the file rather than the order they were produced.
-   [NullDiagnosticConsumer](diagnostics/null_diagnostics.h): suppresses
    diagnostics, particularly for tests.

### Producing diagnostics

> [2;2R[3;1R[>0;95;0c]10;rgb:c7f1/c7f1/c7f1]11;rgb:0000/0000/0000

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Author: Had fixed this, forgot to push it.

Diagnostics are used to surface issues from compilation. A simple diagnostic
looks like:

```cpp
CARBON_DIAGNOSTIC(InvalidCode, Error, "Code is invalid");
emitter.Emit(location, InvalidCode);
```

Here, `CARBON_DIAGNOSTIC` defines a static instance of a diagnostic named
`InvalidCode` with the associated severity (`Error` or `Warning`).

The `Emit` call produces a single instance of the diagnostic. When emitted,
`"Code is invalid"` will be the message used. The type of `location` depends on

> the DiagnosticEmitter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the `DiagnosticEmitter`.
```

# Toolchain

<!--
Part of the Carbon Language project, under the Apache License v2.0 with LLVM
Exceptions. See /LICENSE for license information.
SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0 WITH LLVM-exception
-->

The toolchain represents the production portion of Carbon. At a high level, the
toolchain's top priorities are:

-   Correctness.
-   Quality of generated code, including its performance.
-   Compilation performance.
-   Quality of diagnostics for incorrect or questionable code.

> 

Reviewer 2: Maybe a TODO to flesh this out a bit?

```suggestion
TODO: Add an expanded document that fully explains the goals and priorities and link to it here.

```

> The main compiler is `//toolchain/driver:carbon`. When compiling, the current
> flow of data is:

Reviewer 2: Maybe capture a bit of nuance about the design being a collection of libraries?

```suggestion
The compiler is organized into a collection of libraries that can be used independently. This includes the `//toolchain/driver` libraries that orchestrate the typical and expected compilation flow using the other libraries. The driver also includes the primary command-line tool: `//toolchain/driver:carbon`.

The typical compilation flow of data is:
```

1. Load the file into a [SourceBuffer](source/source_buffer.h).
2. Lex a SourceBuffer into a [TokenizedBuffer](lexer/tokenized_buffer.h).
3. Parse a TokenizedBuffer into a [ParseTree](parser/parse_tree.h).
4. Transform a ParseTree into a [SemanticsIR](semantics/semantics_ir.h).
5. This flow is still incomplete: code generation, using LLVM, is still
   required.

## Lexing

The [TokenizedBuffer](lexer/tokenized_buffer.h) is the central point of lexing.

The entire source buffer is converted into tokens before parsing begins. Tokens
are referred to by an opaque handle, `TokenizedBuffer::Token`, which is

> represented as a 32-bit integer into the token array. The tokenized buffer can

Reviewer 2: Minor wording alternative that focus more on the design and less on the implementation:

```suggestion
represented as a dense integer index into the buffer. The tokenized buffer can
```

`llvm::None` indicates that parsing has failed and an error diagnostic has
already been produced, and that the current region of the parse tree might not
meet its invariants so that the caller should create an invalid parse tree node.
Other return values indicate that parsing was either successful or that any
encountered errors have been recovered from, so the caller can create a valid
parse tree node.

The produced ParseTree is in reverse postorder. For example, given the code:

```carbon
fn foo() -> f64 {
  return 42;
}
```

The node order is (with indentation to indicate nesting):

```carbon
  Index 0: kind DeclaredName
    Index 1: kind ParameterListEnd
  Index 2: kind ParameterList
    Index 3: kind Literal
  Index 4: kind ReturnType
      Index 5: kind Literal
      Index 6: kind StatementEnd
    Index 7: kind ReturnStatement
    Index 8: kind CodeBlockEnd
  Index 9: kind CodeBlock
Index 10: kind FunctionDeclaration
Index 11: kind FileEnd
```

This is done this way in order to allow for more efficient processing of a file.
As a consequence, the SemanticsIR does a lot of reversal of the ParseTree
ordering in order to visit code in source order.

> ### Stack overflow
> 
> The ParseTree has been prone to stack overflows. As a consequence,
> `CARBON_RETURN_IF_STACK_LIMITED` is checked at the start of most functions in
> order to avoid errors. This manages depth increments and, when the scope exits,
> decrements.

Reviewer 2: WDYT about adding some future work notes? For example:

```suggestion
### Stack overflow

The ParseTree has been prone to stack overflows. As a consequence,
`CARBON_RETURN_IF_STACK_LIMITED` is checked at the start of most functions in
order to avoid errors. This manages depth increments and, when the scope exits,
decrements.

#### Future work

We are interested in eventually exploring ways to adjust the parser design to be non-recursive and remove this limitation, but it hasn't yet been a priority and keeping the code simple seems better until the language design stabilizes.
```

the Carbon language, and the parser ensures that a valid parse tree node always
has a valid structure. However, any parse tree node can be marked as invalid,
and an invalid parse tree node can contain child nodes of any kind in any order.
This is intended to model the situation where parsing failed because the code
did not match the grammar, but we were still able to parse some subexpressions,
as an aid for non-compiler tools such as syntax highlighters or refactoring
tools.

Many functions in the parser return `llvm::Optional<T>`. A return value of
`llvm::None` indicates that parsing has failed and an error diagnostic has
already been produced, and that the current region of the parse tree might not
meet its invariants so that the caller should create an invalid parse tree node.
Other return values indicate that parsing was either successful or that any
encountered errors have been recovered from, so the caller can create a valid
parse tree node.

The produced ParseTree is in reverse postorder. For example, given the code:

```carbon
fn foo() -> f64 {
  return 42;
}
```

The node order is (with indentation to indicate nesting):

> ```carbon

Reviewer: Maybe we shouldn't specify any file type here? (It doesn't seem possible to give a suggestion for this edit!)

Author: Done

Diagnostics are used to surface issues from compilation. A simple diagnostic
looks like:

```cpp
CARBON_DIAGNOSTIC(InvalidCode, Error, "Code is invalid");
emitter.Emit(location, InvalidCode);
```

Here, `CARBON_DIAGNOSTIC` defines a static instance of a diagnostic named
`InvalidCode` with the associated severity (`Error` or `Warning`).

The `Emit` call produces a single instance of the diagnostic. When emitted,
`"Code is invalid"` will be the message used. The type of `location` depends on
the `DiagnosticEmitter`.

A diagnostic with an argument looks like:

```cpp
CARBON_DIAGNOSTIC(InvalidCharacter, Error, "Invalid character `{0}`.", char);
emitter.Emit(location, InvalidCharacter, invalid_char);
```

Here, the additional `char` argument to `CARBON_DIAGNOSTIC` specifies the type
of an argument to expect for message formatting. The `invalid_char` argument to
`Emit` provides the matching value. It's then passed along with the diagnostic
message format to `llvm::formatv` in order to produce the final diagnostic
message.

#### Diagnostic registry

There is a [registry](diagnostics/diagnostic_registry.def) which all diagnostics
must be added to. Each diagnostic has a line like:

> ```cppp

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```cpp
```
